---
layout: post
title: Law of Large Numbers for Infinite Random Matrices over a Finite Field
coauthors:
  - name: Alexey Bufetov
    web: 'http://math.mit.edu/directory/profile.php?pid=1589'
arXiv: 1402.1772 [math.PR]
date: 2014-02-07 02:00:00
comments: false
categories: paper
published: true
more-text: Full abstract
show-date: true
journal-ref: Selecta Math. 21 (2015),~no. 4, 1271–1338
journal-web: 'https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00029-015-0179-9'
#image: __STORAGE_URL__/img/papers/
#image-alt:
---

Asymptotic representation theory of general linear groups $GL(n,q)$ over a
finite field leads to studying probability measures $\rho$ on the group $U$ of all
infinite uni-uppertriangular matrices over $F_q$, with the condition that $\rho$ is
invariant under conjugations by arbitrary infinite matrices.<!--more--> Such probability
measures form an infinite-dimensional simplex, and the description of its
extreme points (in other words, ergodic measures $\rho$) was conjectured by Kerov
in connection with nonnegative specializations of Hall-Littlewood symmetric
functions.
<br />Vershik and Kerov also conjectured the following Law of Large Numbers.
Consider an $n\times n$ diagonal submatrix of the infinite random matrix drawn from
an ergodic measure coming from the Kerov's conjectural classification. The
sizes of Jordan blocks of the submatrix can be interpreted as a (random)
partition of $n$, or, equivalently, as a (random) Young diagram $\lambda(n)$ with $n$
boxes. Then, as $n$ goes to infinity, the rows and columns of $\lambda(n)$ have
almost sure limiting frequencies corresponding to parameters of this ergodic
measure.
<br />Our main result is the proof of this Law of Large Numbers. We achieve it by
analyzing a new randomized Robinson-Schensted-Knuth (RSK) insertion algorithm
which samples random Young diagrams $\lambda(n)$ coming from ergodic measures.
The probability weights of these Young diagrams are expressed in terms of
Hall-Littlewood symmetric functions. Our insertion algorithm is a modified and
extended version of a recent construction by Borodin and the second author
(<a href="/abs/1305.5501">arXiv:1305.5501</a>). 
On the other hand, our randomized RSK insertion generalizes
a version of the RSK insertion introduced by Vershik and Kerov (1986) in
connection with asymptotic representation theory of symmetric groups (which is
governed by nonnegative specializations of Schur symmetric functions).
