---
layout: post
title: Spin deformation of q-Whittaker polynomials and Whittaker functions
comments: false
categories: blog math talk
talk-url: __STORAGE_URL__/research_files/talks/sqw.pdf
published: true
more-text: Download pdf
image: __STORAGE_URL__/research_files/img/sqw.png
image-alt: An example of the Yang-Baxter equation in the Schur case
pdf-size: 33.6 MB
---

Spin $q$-Whittaker symmetric polynomials labeled by partitions $\lambda$ were recently introduced by Borodin and Wheeler ([arXiv:1701.06292](https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.06292)) in the context of integrable $\mathfrak{sl}_2$ vertex models. They are a one-parameter deformation of the $t=0$ Macdonald polynomials. We present a new, more convenient modification of spin $q$-Whittaker polynomials and find two Macdonald type $q$-difference operators acting diagonally in these polynomials with eigenvalues, respectively, $q^{-\lambda_1}$ and $q^{\lambda_N}$ (where $\lambda$ is the polynomial's label). We study probability measures on interlacing arrays based on spin $q$-Whittaker polynomials, and match their observables with known stochastic particle systems such as the $q$-Hahn TASEP.
	
In a scaling limit as $q\nearrow 1$, spin $q$-Whittaker polynomials turn into a new one-parameter deformation of the $\mathfrak{gl}_n$ Whittaker functions. The rescaled Pieri type rule gives rise to a one-parameter deformation of the quantum Toda Hamiltonian. The deformed Hamiltonian acts diagonally on our new spin Whittaker functions. On the stochastic side, as $q\nearrow 1$ we discover a multilevel extension of the beta polymer model of Barraquand and Corwin ([arXiv:1503.04117](https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.04117)), and relate it to spin Whittaker functions.

Based on a [joint work with Matteo Mucciconi][ref36]
and earlier works with [Alexey Bufetov][ref27] and [both of them][ref31].

{% include references.md %}

<!--more-->

<a href="{{ page.talk-url | replace: '__STORAGE_URL__', site.storage_url}}" target="_blank">PDF ({{page.pdf-size}})</a>
