---
layout: post
title: "Critical and Tricritical Hard Objects on Bicolorable Random Lattices: Exact Solutions"
arxiv-id: "cond-mat/0201213"
date: 2002-01-14
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
  - "hep-th"
  - "math.CO"
authors:
  - "J. Bouttier"
  - "P. Di Francesco"
  - "E. Guitter"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true---
{% raw %}<p>We address the general problem of hard objects on random lattices, and emphasize the crucial role played by the colorability of the lattices to ensure the existence of a crystallization transition. We first solve explicitly the naive (colorless) random-lattice version of the hard-square model and find that the only matter critical point is the non-unitary Lee-Yang edge singularity. We then show how to restore the crystallization transition of the hard-square model by considering the same model on bicolored random lattices. Solving this model exactly, we show moreover that the crystallization transition point lies in the universality class of the Ising model coupled to 2D quantum gravity. We finally extend our analysis to a new two-particle exclusion model, whose regular lattice version involves hard squares of two different sizes. The exact solution of this model on bicolorable random lattices displays a phase diagram with two (continuous and discontinuous) crystallization transition lines meeting at a higher order critical point, in the universality class of the tricritical Ising model coupled to 2D quantum gravity.</p>{% endraw %}
