---
layout: post
title: "Multiclass Hammersley-Aldous-Diaconis process and multiclass-customer queues"
arxiv-id: "0707.4202"
date: 2007-07-28
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
  - "math-ph"
  - "math.MP"
authors:
  - "Pablo A. Ferrari"
  - "James B. Martin"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
---
{% raw %}<p>In the Hammersley-Aldous-Diaconis process infinitely many particles sit in R and at most one particle is allowed at each position. A particle at x$ whose nearest neighbor to the right is at y, jumps at rate y-x to a position uniformly distributed in the interval (x,y). The basic coupling between trajectories with different initial configuration induces a process with different classes of particles. We show that the invariant measures for the two-class process can be obtained as follows. First, a stationary M/M/1 queue is constructed as a function of two homogeneous Poisson processes, the arrivals with rate \lambda and the (attempted) services with rate \rho>\lambda. Then put the first class particles at the instants of departures (effective services) and second class particles at the instants of unused services. The procedure is generalized for the n-class case by using n-1 queues in tandem with n-1 priority-types of customers. A multi-line process is introduced; it consists of a coupling (different from Liggett's basic coupling), having as invariant measure the product of Poisson processes. The definition of the multi-line process involves the dual points of the space-time Poisson process used in the graphical construction of the system. The coupled process is a transformation of the multi-line process and its invariant measure the transformation described above of the product measure.</p>{% endraw %}
