---
layout: post
title: "Exact and asymptotic features of the edge density profile for the one component plasma in two dimensions"
arxiv-id: "1310.3130"
date: 2013-10-11
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
authors:
  - "T. Can"
  - "P. J. Forrester"
  - "G. Tellez"
  - "P. Wiegmann"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
---
{% raw %}<p>There is a well known analogy between the Laughlin trial wave function for the fractional quantum Hall effect, and the Boltzmann factor for the two-dimensional one-component plasma. The latter requires analytic continuation beyond the finite geometry used in its derivation. We consider both disk and cylinder geometry, and focus attention on the exact and asymptotic features of the edge density. At the special coupling \Gamma := q^2/k_BT=2 the system is exactly solvable. In particular the k-point correlation can be written as a k \times k determinant, allowing the edge density to be computed to first order in \Gamma - 2. A double layer structure is found, which in turn implies an overshoot of the density as the edge of the leading support is approached from inside the plasma. Asymptotic analysis shows that the deviation from the leading order (step function) value is different for into the plasma than for outside. For general \Gamma, a Gaussian fluctuation formula is used to study the large deviation form of the density for N large but finite. This asymptotic form involves thermodynamic quantities which we independently study, and moreover an appropriate scaling gives the asymptotic decay of the limiting edge density outside of the plasma.</p>{% endraw %}
