---
layout: post
title: "KPZ equation, its renormalization and invariant measures"
arxiv-id: "1407.7310"
date: 2014-07-28
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
authors:
  - "Tadahisa Funaki"
  - "Jeremy Quastel"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
related-papers:
  - "2309.17276"
  - "2007.12203"
  - "1109.6811"
  - "2007.06505"
  - "1708.06006"
---
{% raw %}<p>The Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) equation is a stochastic partial differential equation which is ill-posed because the nonlinearity is marginally defined with respect to the roughness of the forcing noise. However, its Cole-Hopf solution, defined as the logarithm of the solution of the linear stochastic heat equation (SHE) with a multiplicative noise, is a mathematically well-defined object. In fact, Hairer [13] has recently proved that the solution of SHE can actually be derived through the Cole-Hopf transform of the solution of the KPZ equation with a suitable renormalization under periodic boundary conditions. This transformation is unfortunately not well adapted to studying the invariant measures of these Markov processes. The present paper introduces a different type of regularization for the KPZ equation on the whole line <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi mathvariant="double-struck">R</mi></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">\mathbb{R}</annotation></semantics></math></span> or under periodic boundary conditions, which is appropriate from the viewpoint of studying the invariant measures. The Cole-Hopf transform applied to this equation leads to an SHE with a smeared noise having an extra complicated nonlinear term. Under time average and in the stationary regime, it is shown that this term can be replaced by a simple linear term, so that the limit equation is the linear SHE with an extra linear term with coefficient 1/24. The methods are essentially stochastic analytic: The Wiener-It\^o expansion and a similar method for establishing the Boltzmann-Gibbs principle are used. As a result, it is shown that the distribution of a two-sided geometric Brownian motion with a height shift given by Lebesgue measure is invariant under the evolution determined by the SHE on <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi mathvariant="double-struck">R</mi></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">\mathbb{R}</annotation></semantics></math></span>.</p>{% endraw %}
