---
layout: post
title: "Littelmann path model for geometric crystals"
arxiv-id: "1405.6437"
date: 2014-05-25
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.RT"
  - "math.GR"
authors:
  - "Reda Chhaibi"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
---
{% raw %}<p>We construct a path model for geometric crystals in the sense of Berenstein and Kazhdan. Our model is in every way similar to Littelmann's and tropicalizes to his path model. This paper lays the foundational material for a subsequent work where we examine the measure induced on geometric crystals by Brownian motion. If we call Berenstein and Kazhdan's realization of geometric crystals the group picture, we prove that the path model projects onto the group picture thanks to a morphism of crystals that restricts to an isomorphism on connected components. This projection is in fact the geometric analogue of the Robinson-Schensted correspondence and involves solving a left-invariant differential equation on the Borel subgroup. Moreover, we identify the geometric Pitman transform <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><msub><mi mathvariant="script">T</mi><msub><mi>w</mi><mn>0</mn></msub></msub></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">\mathcal{T}_{w_0}</annotation></semantics></math></span> introduced by Biane, Bougerol and O'Connell as the transform giving the path with highest weight, in the geometric crystal path model. This allows to prove a geometric version of Littelmann's independence theorem. The geometric Robinson-Schensted correspondence is detailed in a special section, because of its importance. Finally, we exhibit the Kashiwara and Sch\"utzenberger involutions in both the group picture and the path model. In an appendix, we explain how the left-invariant flow is related to the image of the Casimir element in Kostant's Whittaker model.</p>{% endraw %}
