---
layout: post
title: "Populations of Solutions to Cyclotomic Bethe Equations"
arxiv-id: "1505.07582"
date: 2015-05-28
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.QA"
authors:
  - "Alexander Varchenko"
  - "Charles A. S. Young"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true---
{% raw %}<p>We study solutions of the Bethe Ansatz equations for the cyclotomic Gaudin model of [Vicedo B., Young C.A.S., arXiv:1409.6937]. We give two interpretations of such solutions: as critical points of a cyclotomic master function, and as critical points with cyclotomic symmetry of a certain "extended" master function. In finite types, this yields a correspondence between the Bethe eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the cyclotomic Gaudin model and those of an "extended" non-cyclotomic Gaudin model. We proceed to define populations of solutions to the cyclotomic Bethe equations, in the sense of [Mukhin E., Varchenko A., Commun. Contemp. Math. 6 (2004), 111-163, math.QA/0209017], for diagram automorphisms of Kac-Moody Lie algebras. In the case of type A with the diagram automorphism, we associate to each population a vector space of quasi-polynomials with specified ramification conditions. This vector space is equipped with a <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><msub><mi mathvariant="double-struck">Z</mi><mn>2</mn></msub></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">{\mathbb Z}_2</annotation></semantics></math></span>-gradation and a non-degenerate bilinear form which is (skew-)symmetric on the even (resp. odd) graded subspace. We show that the population of cyclotomic critical points is isomorphic to the variety of isotropic full flags in this space.</p>{% endraw %}
