---
layout: post
title: "The Competition of Roughness and Curvature in Area-Constrained Polymer Models"
arxiv-id: "1704.07360"
date: 2017-04-24T17:58:42Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
  - "math-ph"
authors:
  - "Riddhipratim Basu"
  - "Shirshendu Ganguly"
  - "Alan Hammond"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
---
{% raw %}<p>The competition between local Brownian roughness and global parabolic curvature experienced in many random interface models reflects an important aspect of the KPZ universality class. It may be summarised by an exponent triple $(1/2,1/3,2/3)$ representing local interface fluctuation, local roughness (or inward deviation) and convex hull facet length. The three effects arise, for example, in droplets in planar Ising models (Alexander, '01, Hammond, '11,'12). In this article, we offer a new perspective on this phenomenon. We consider directed last passage percolation model in the plane, a paradigmatic example in the KPZ universality class, and constrain the maximizing path under the additional requirement of enclosing an atypically large area. The interface suffers a constraint of parabolic curvature as before, but now its local structure is the KPZ fixed point polymer's rather than Brownian. The local interface fluctuation exponent is thus two-thirds rather than one-half. We prove that the facet lengths of the constrained path's convex hull are governed by an exponent of $3/4$, and inward deviation by an exponent of $1/2$. That is, the exponent triple is now $(2/3,1/2,3/4)$ in place of $(1/2,1/3,2/3)$. This phenomenon appears to be shared among various isoperimetrically extremal circuits in local randomness. Indeed, we formulate a conjecture to this effect concerning such circuits in supercritical percolation, whose Wulff-like first-order behaviour was recently established (Biskup, Louidor, Procaccia and Rosenthal, '12).</p>{% endraw %}
