---
layout: post
title: "Quasisymmetric Power Sums"
arxiv-id: "1710.11613"
date: 2017-10-31
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.CO"
authors:
  - "Cristina Ballantine"
  - "Zajj Daugherty"
  - "Angela Hicks"
  - "Sarah Mason,
  Elizabeth Niese"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
related-papers:
  - "hep-th/9407124"
---
{% raw %}<p>In the 1995 paper entitled "Noncommutative symmetric functions," Gelfand, et. al. defined two noncommutative symmetric function analogues for the power sum basis of the symmetric functions, along with analogues for the elementary and the homogeneous bases. They did not consider the noncommutative symmetric power sum duals in the quasisymmetric functions, which have since been explored only in passing by Derksen and Malvenuto-Reutenauer. These two distinct quasisymmetric power sum bases are the topic of this paper. In contrast to the simplicity of the symmetric power sums, or the other well known bases of the quasisymmetric functions, the quasisymmetric power sums have a more complex combinatorial description. As a result, although symmetric function proofs often translate directly to quasisymmetric analogues, this is not the case for quasisymmetric power sums. Neither is there a model for working with the quasisymmetric power sums in the work of Gelfand, et. al., which relies heavily on quasi-determinants (which can only be exploited by duality for our purposes) and is not particularly combinatorial in nature. This paper therefore offers a first glimpse at working with these two relatively unstudied quasisymmetric bases, avoiding duality where possible to encourage a previously unexplored combinatorial understanding.</p>{% endraw %}
