---
layout: post
title: "Coulomb-gas electrostatics controls large fluctuations of the KPZ equation"
arxiv-id: "1803.05887"
date: 2018-03-15T17:40:41Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
authors:
  - "Ivan Corwin"
  - "Promit Ghosal"
  - "Alexandre Krajenbrink"
  - "Pierre Le Doussal"
  - "Li-Cheng Tsai"
nsf-frg: true
source: import
published: true
related-papers:
  - "2206.05549"
  - "1809.03410"
  - "2012.00814"
---
{% raw %}<p>We establish a large deviation principle for the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) equation, providing precise control over the left tail of the height distribution for narrow wedge initial condition. Our analysis exploits an exact connection between the KPZ one-point distribution and the Airy point process -- an infinite particle Coulomb-gas which arises at the spectral edge in random matrix theory. We develop the large deviation principle for the Airy point process and use it to compute, in a straight-forward and assumption-free manner, the KPZ large deviation rate function in terms of an electrostatic problem (whose solution we evaluate). This method also applies to the half-space KPZ equation, showing that its rate function is half of the full-space rate function. In addition to these long-time estimates, we provide rigorous proof of finite-time tail bounds on the KPZ distribution which demonstrate a crossover between exponential decay with exponent <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mn>3</mn></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">3</annotation></semantics></math></span> (in the shallow left tail) to exponent <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mn>5</mn><mi mathvariant="normal">/</mi><mn>2</mn></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">5/2</annotation></semantics></math></span> (in the deep left tail). The full-space KPZ rate function agrees with the one computed in Sasorov et al. [J. Stat. Mech, 063203 (2017)] via a WKB approximation analysis of a non-local, non-linear integro-differential equation generalizing Painlev\'e II which Amir et al. [Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 64, 466 (2011)] related to the KPZ one-point distribution.</p>{% endraw %}
