---
layout: post
title: "Box-ball system: soliton and tree decomposition of excursions"
arxiv-id: "1906.06405"
date: 2019-06-14
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
authors:
  - "Pablo A Ferrari"
  - "Davide Gabrielli"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
---
{% raw %}<p>We review combinatorial properties of solitons of the Box-Ball system introduced by Takahashi and Satsuma in 1990. Starting with several definitions of the system, we describe ways to identify solitons and review a proof of the conservation of the solitons under the dynamics. Ferrari, Nguyen, Rolla and Wang 2018 proposed a soliton decomposition of a configuration into a family of vectors, one for each soliton size. Based on this decompositions, the authors have proposed a family of measures on the set of excursions which induces invariant distributions for the Box-Ball System. In this paper, we propose a new soliton decomposition which is equivalent to a branch decomposition of the tree associated to the excursion, see Le Gall 2005. A ball configuration distributed as independent Bernoulli variables of parameter <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>λ</mi><mo>&lt;</mo><mn>1</mn><mi mathvariant="normal">/</mi><mn>2</mn></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">\lambda&lt;1/2</annotation></semantics></math></span> is in correspondence with a simple random walk with negative drift <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mn>2</mn><mi>λ</mi><mo>−</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">2\lambda-1</annotation></semantics></math></span> and infinitely many excursions over the local minima. In this case the authors have proven that the soliton decomposition of the walk consists on independent double-infinite vectors of iid geometric random variables. We show that this property is shared by the branch decomposition of the excursion trees of the random walk and discuss a corresponding construction of a Geometric branching process with independent but not identically distributed Geometric random variables.</p>{% endraw %}
