---
layout: post
title: "Spin q-Whittaker polynomials and deformed quantum Toda"
arxiv-id: "2003.14260"
date: 2020-03-31T14:45:50Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
authors:
  - "Matteo Mucciconi"
  - "Leonid Petrov"
nsf-frg: true
source: import
published: true
---
{% raw %}<p>Spin $q$-Whittaker symmetric polynomials labeled by partitions $\lambda$ were recently introduced by Borodin and Wheeler (arXiv:1701.06292) in the context of integrable $\mathfrak{sl}_2$ vertex models. They are a one-parameter deformation of the $t=0$ Macdonald polynomials. We present a new, more convenient modification of spin $q$-Whittaker polynomials and find two Macdonald type $q$-difference operators acting diagonally in these polynomials with eigenvalues, respectively, $q^{-\lambda_1}$ and $q^{\lambda_N}$ (where $\lambda$ is the polynomial's label). We study probability measures on interlacing arrays based on spin $q$-Whittaker polynomials, and match their observables with known stochastic particle systems such as the $q$-Hahn TASEP. In a scaling limit as $q\nearrow 1$, spin $q$-Whittaker polynomials turn into a new one-parameter deformation of the $\mathfrak{gl}_n$ Whittaker functions. The rescaled Pieri type rule gives rise to a one-parameter deformation of the quantum Toda Hamiltonian. The deformed Hamiltonian acts diagonally on our new spin Whittaker functions. On the stochastic side, as $q\nearrow 1$ we discover a multilevel extension of the beta polymer model of Barraquand and Corwin (arXiv:1503.04117), and relate it to spin Whittaker functions.</p>{% endraw %}
