---
layout: post
title: "Sharp upper tail behavior of line ensembles via the tangent method"
arxiv-id: "2208.08922"
date: 2022-08-18T15:47:24Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
  - "math-ph"
authors:
  - "Shirshendu Ganguly"
  - "Milind Hegde"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
---
{% raw %}<p>We develop a new probabilistic and geometric method to obtain several sharp results pertaining to the upper tail behavior of continuum Gibbs measures on infinite ensembles of random continuous curves, also known as line ensembles, satisfying some natural assumptions. The arguments make crucial use of Brownian resampling invariance properties and correlation inequalities admitted by such Gibbs measures. We obtain sharp one-point upper tail estimates showing that the probability of the value at zero being larger than $θ$ is $\exp(-\frac{4}{3}θ^{3/2}(1+o(1)))$. A key intermediate step is developing a precise understanding of the profile when conditioned on the value at zero equaling $θ$. Our method further allows one to obtain multi-point asymptotics which were out of reach of previous approaches. As an example, we prove sharp explicit two-point upper tail estimates. This framework is then used to establish the corresponding results for the KPZ equation, which are all new. Even for the zero-temperature case of the Airy$_2$ process, our arguments yield new proofs for one-point estimates previously known due to its connections to random matrix theory, as well as new two-point asymptotics. To showcase the reach of the method, we obtain the same results in a purely non-integrable setting under only assumptions of stationarity and extremality in the class of Gibbs measures. Our method bears resemblance to the tangent method introduced by Colomo-Sportiello and mathematically realized by Aggarwal in the context of the six-vertex model.</p>{% endraw %}
