---
layout: post
title: "Quasi-polynomial representations of double affine Hecke algebras"
arxiv-id: "2204.13729"
date: 2022-04-28T18:18:16Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.RT"
  - "math.QA"
authors:
  - "Siddhartha Sahi"
  - "Jasper Stokman"
  - "Vidya Venkateswaran"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
---
{% raw %}We introduce an explicit family of representations of the double affine Hecke algebra $\mathbb{H}$ acting on spaces of quasi-polynomials, defined in terms of truncated Demazure-Lusztig type operators. We show that these quasi-polynomial representations provide concrete realizations of a natural family of cyclic $Y$-parabolically induced $\mathbb{H}$-representations. We recover Cherednik's well-known polynomial representation as a special case. The quasi-polynomial representation gives rise to a family of commuting operators acting on spaces of quasi-polynomials. These generalize the Cherednik operators, which are fundamental in the study of Macdonald polynomials. We provide a detailed study of their joint eigenfunctions, which may be regarded as quasi-polynomial, multi-parametric generalizations of nonsymmetric Macdonald polynomials. We also introduce generalizations of symmetric Macdonald polynomials, which are invariant under a multi-parametric generalization of the standard Weyl group action. We connect our results to the representation theory of metaplectic covers of reductive groups over non-archimedean local fields. We introduce root system generalizations of the metaplectic polynomials from our previous work by taking a suitable restriction and reparametrization of the quasi-polynomial generalizations of Macdonald polynomials. We show that metaplectic Iwahori-Whittaker functions can be recovered by taking the Whittaker limit of these metaplectic polynomials.{% endraw %}
