---
layout: post
title: "Towards Understanding the Dynamics of Gaussian-Stein Variational Gradient Descent"
arxiv-id: "2305.14076"
date: 2023-05-23T13:55:47Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.ST"
authors:
  - "Tianle Liu"
  - "Promit Ghosal"
  - "Krishnakumar Balasubramanian"
  - "Natesh S. Pillai"
nsf-frg: false
source: import
published: true
related-papers:
  - "2602.05172"
---
{% raw %}<p>Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) is a nonparametric particle-based deterministic sampling algorithm. Despite its wide usage, understanding the theoretical properties of SVGD has remained a challenging problem. For sampling from a Gaussian target, the SVGD dynamics with a bilinear kernel will remain Gaussian as long as the initializer is Gaussian. Inspired by this fact, we undertake a detailed theoretical study of the Gaussian-SVGD, i.e., SVGD projected to the family of Gaussian distributions via the bilinear kernel, or equivalently Gaussian variational inference (GVI) with SVGD. We present a complete picture by considering both the mean-field PDE and discrete particle systems. When the target is strongly log-concave, the mean-field Gaussian-SVGD dynamics is proven to converge linearly to the Gaussian distribution closest to the target in KL divergence. In the finite-particle setting, there is both uniform in time convergence to the mean-field limit and linear convergence in time to the equilibrium if the target is Gaussian. In the general case, we propose a density-based and a particle-based implementation of the Gaussian-SVGD, and show that several recent algorithms for GVI, proposed from different perspectives, emerge as special cases of our unified framework. Interestingly, one of the new particle-based instance from this framework empirically outperforms existing approaches. Our results make concrete contributions towards obtaining a deeper understanding of both SVGD and GVI.</p>{% endraw %}
