---
layout: post
title: "Superdiffusive Central Limit Theorem for the Stochastic Burgers Equation at the critical dimension"
arxiv-id: "2501.00344"
date: 2024-12-31T08:36:59Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
  - "math-ph"
  - "math.AP"
authors:
  - "Giuseppe Cannizzaro"
  - "Quentin Moulard"
  - "Fabio Toninelli"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
---
{% raw %}<p>The Stochastic Burgers Equation (SBE) is a singular, non-linear Stochastic Partial Differential Equation (SPDE) that describes, on mesoscopic scales, the fluctuations of stochastic driven diffusive systems with a conserved scalar quantity. In space dimension d = 2, the SBE is critical, being formally scale invariant under diffusive scaling. As such, it falls outside of the domain of applicability of the theories of Regularity Structures and paracontrolled calculus. In apparent contrast with the formal scale invariance, we fully prove the conjecture first appeared in [H. van Beijeren, R. Kutner, & H. Spohn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1986] according to which the 2d-SBE is logarithmically superdiffusive, i.e. its diffusion coefficient diverges like $(\log t)^{2/3}$ as $t\to\infty$, thus removing subleading diverging multiplicative corrections in [D. De Gaspari & L. Haunschmid-Sibitz, Electron. J. Probab., 2024] and in [H.-T. Yau, Ann. of Math., 2004] for 2d-ASEP. We precisely identify the constant prefactor of the logarithm and show it is proportional to $λ^{4/3}$, for $λ>0$ the coupling constant, which, intriguingly, turns out to be exactly the same as for the one-dimensional Stochastic Burgers/KPZ equation. More importantly, we prove that, under super-diffusive space-time rescaling, the SBE has an explicit Gaussian fixed point in the Renormalization Group sense, by deriving a superdiffusive central limit-type theorem for its solution. This is the first scaling limit result for a critical singular SPDE, beyond the weak coupling regime, and is obtained via a refined control, on all length-scales, of the resolvent of the generator of the SBE. We believe our methods are well-suited to study other out-of-equilibrium driven diffusive systems at the critical dimension, such as 2d-ASEP, which, we conjecture, have the same large-scale Fixed Point as SBE.</p>{% endraw %}
