---
layout: post
title: "Stochastic dynamics of quasiparticles in the hard rod gas"
arxiv-id: "2510.19693"
date: 2025-10-22T15:43:33Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
authors:
  - "Seema Chahal"
  - "Indranil Mukherjee"
  - "Abhishek Dhar"
  - "Herbert Spohn"
  - "Anupam Kundu"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
related-papers:
  - "2211.11117"
  - "1703.05971"
  - "2305.13037"
---
{% raw %}<p>We consider a one-dimensional gas of hard rods, one of the simplest examples of an interacting integrable model. It is well known that the hydrodynamics of such integrable models can be understood by viewing the system as a gas of quasiparticles. Here, we explore the dynamics of individual quasiparticles for a variety of initial conditions of the background gas. The mean, variance, and two-time correlations are computed exactly and lead to a picture of quasiparticles as drifting Brownian particles. For the case of a homogeneous background, we show that the motion of two tagged quasiparticles is strongly correlated, and they move like a rigid rod at late times. Apart from a microscopic derivation based on the mapping to point particles, we provide an alternate derivation which emphasizes that quasiparticle fluctuations are related to initial phase-space fluctuations, which are carried over in time by Euler scale dynamics. For the homogeneous state, we use the Brownian motion picture to develop a Dean-Kawasaki-type fluctuating hydrodynamic theory, formally having the same structure as that derived recently by Ferrari and Olla. We discuss differences with existing proposals on the hydrodynamics of hard rods and some puzzles.</p>{% endraw %}
