---
layout: post
title: "The Six-Vertex Yang-Baxter Groupoid"
arxiv-id: "2503.05960"
date: 2025-03-07T21:54:25Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.QA"
authors:
  - "Daniel Bump"
  - "Slava Naprienko"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
---
{% raw %}<p>A parametrized Yang-Baxter equation is usually defined to be a map from a group to a set of R-matrices, satisfying the Yang-Baxter commutation relation. These are a mainstay of solvable lattice models. We will show how the parameter space can sometimes be enlarged to a groupoid, and give two examples of such groupoid parametrized Yang-Baxter equations, within the six vertex model. A groupoid parametrized Yang-Baxter equation consists of a groupoid $\mathfrak{G}$ together with a map $\pi:\mathfrak{G}\to\operatorname{End}(V\otimes V)$ for some vector space $V$ such that the Yang-Baxter commutator $[[ \pi(u),\pi(w),\pi(v)]]=0$ if $u,v\in\mathfrak{G}$ are such that the groupoid composition $w=u\star v$ is defined. An important role is played by an object map $\Delta:\mathfrak{G}\to M$ for some set $M$ such that $\Delta(u)=\Delta(v')$, $\Delta(w)=\Delta(v)$ and $\Delta(w')=\Delta(u')$, where $v\mapsto v'$ is the groupoid inverse map. There are two main regimes of the six-vertex model: the free-fermionic point, and everything else. For the free-fermionic point, there exists a parametrized Yang-Baxter equation with a large parameter group $\operatorname{GL}(2)\times\operatorname{GL}(1)$. For non-free-fermionic six-vertex matrices, there are also well-known (group) parametrized Yang-Baxter equations, but these do not account for all possible interactions. Instead we will construct a groupoid parametrized Yang-Baxter equation that accounts for essentially all possible Yang-Baxter equations in the six-vertex model. We will also exhibit a separate groupoid for the five-vertex model. We will show how to construct solvable lattice models based on groupoid parametrized Yang-Baxter equations.</p>{% endraw %}
