---
layout: post
title: "Exclusive Many-Particle Diffusion in Disordered Media and Correlation Functions for Random Vertex Models"
arxiv-id: "cond-mat/9305040"
date: 1993-05-29
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "cond-mat"
authors:
  - "Gunter Schuetz"
  - "Sven Sandow"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
related-papers:
  - "cond-mat/9307027"
  - "cond-mat/0104147"
  - "cond-mat/9602009"
  - "1001.1142"
  - "2310.18055"
---
{% raw %}<p>We consider systems of particles hopping stochastically on <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>d</mi></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">d</annotation></semantics></math></span>-dimensional lattices with space-dependent probabilities. We map the master equation onto an evolution equation in a Fock space where the dynamics are given by a quantum Hamiltonian (continuous time) or a transfer matrix resp. (discrete time). We show that under certain conditions the time-dependent two-point density correlation function in the <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>N</mi></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">N</annotation></semantics></math></span>-particle steady state can be computed from the probability distribution of a single particle moving in the same environment. Focussing on exclusion models where each lattice site can be occupied by at most one particle we discuss as an example for such a stochastic process a generalized Heisenberg antiferromagnet where the strength of the spin-spin coupling is space-dependent. In discrete time one obtains for one-dimensional systems the diagonal-to-diagonal transfer matrix of the two-dimensional six-vertex model with space-dependent vertex weights. For a random distribution of the vertex weights one obtains a version of the random barrier model describing diffusion of particles in disordered media. We derive exact expressions for the averaged two-point density correlation functions in the presence of weak, correlated disorder.</p>{% endraw %}
