---
layout: post
title: "Noncommutative symmetric functions"
arxiv-id: "hep-th/9407124"
date: 1994-07-20
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "hep-th"
  - "math.QA"
authors:
  - "Israel Gelfand"
  - "D. Krob"
  - "Alain Lascoux"
  - "B. Leclerc"
  - "V. S. Retakh,
  J.-Y. Thibon"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
related-papers:
  - "math/0410468"
  - "math/0410470"
  - "1710.11613"
  - "2412.11013"
  - "0806.3682"
---
{% raw %}<p>This paper presents a noncommutative theory of symmetric functions, based on the notion of quasi-determinant. We begin with a formal theory, corresponding to the case of symmetric functions in an infinite number of independent variables. This allows us to endow the resulting algebra with a Hopf structure, which leads to a new method for computing in descent algebras. It also gives unified reinterpretation of a number of classical constructions. Next, we study the noncommutative analogs of symmetric polynomials. One arrives at different constructions, according to the particular kind of application under consideration. For example, when a polynomial with noncommutative coefficients in one central variable is decomposed as a product of linear factors, the roots of these factors differ from those of the expanded polynomial. Thus, according to whether one is interested in the construction of a polynomial with given roots or in the expansion of a product of linear factors, one has to consider two distinct specializations of the formal symmetric functions. A third type appears when one looks for a noncommutative generalization of applications related to the notion of characteristic polynomial of a matrix. This construction can be applied, for instance, to the noncommutative matrices formed by the generators of the universal enveloping algebra <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>U</mi><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>g</mi><msub><mi>l</mi><mi>n</mi></msub><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">U(gl_n)</annotation></semantics></math></span> or of</p>{% endraw %}
