---
layout: post
title: "Uniform Asymptotics for Polynomials Orthogonal With Respect to a General Class of Discrete Weights and Universality Results for Associated Ensembles: Announcement of Results"
arxiv-id: "math/0212149"
date: 2002-12-10
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.CA"
  - "math.PR"
  - "nlin.SI"
authors:
  - "Jinho Baik"
  - "Thomas Kriecherbauer"
  - "Ken T. -R. McLaughlin"
  - "Peter D. Miller"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
related-papers:
  - "1412.8580"
  - "1410.3948"
  - "math/0310278"
  - "0909.1985"
  - "1106.6168"
---
{% raw %}<p>We compute the pointwise asymptotics of orthogonal polynomials with respect to a general class of pure point measures supported on finite sets as both the number of nodes of the measure and also the degree of the orthogonal polynomials become large. The class of orthogonal polynomials we consider includes as special cases the Krawtchouk and Hahn classical discrete orthogonal polynomials, but is far more general. In particular, we consider nodes that are not necessarily equally spaced. The asymptotic results are given with error bound for all points in the complex plane except for a finite union of discs of arbitrarily small but fixed radii. These exceptional discs are the neighborhoods of the so-called band edges of the associated equilibrium measure. As applications, we prove universality results for correlation functions of a general class of discrete orthogonal polynomial ensembles, and in particular we deduce asymptotic formulae with error bound for certain statistics relevant in the random tiling of a hexagon with rhombus-shaped tiles. The discrete orthogonal polynomials are characterized in terms of a a Riemann-Hilbert problem formulated for a meromorphic matrix with certain pole conditions. By extending the methods of [17, 22], we suggest a general and unifying approach to handle Riemann-Hilbert problems in the situation when poles of the unknown matrix are accumulating on some set in the asymptotic limit of interest.</p>{% endraw %}
