---
layout: post
title: "Parallel Coupling of Symmetric and Asymmetric Exclusion Processes"
arxiv-id: "0807.0803"
date: 2008-07-04
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
  - "cond-mat.soft"
authors:
  - "K. Tsekouras"
  - "A. B. Kolomeisky"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
related-papers:
  - "cond-mat/0407224"
  - "cond-mat/0602059"
  - "0711.1507"
  - "1002.0273"
  - "cond-mat/0703375"
---
{% raw %}<p>A system consisting of two parallel coupled channels where particles in one of them follow the rules of totally asymmetric exclusion processes (TASEP) and in another one move as in symmetric simple exclusion processes (SSEP) is investigated theoretically. Particles interact with each other via hard-core exclusion potential, and in the asymmetric channel they can only hop in one direction, while on the symmetric lattice particles jump in both directions with equal probabilities. Inter-channel transitions are also allowed at every site of both lattices. Stationary state properties of the system are solved exactly in the limit of strong couplings between the channels. It is shown that strong symmetric couplings between totally asymmetric and symmetric channels lead to an effective partially asymmetric simple exclusion process (PASEP) and properties of both channels become almost identical. However, strong asymmetric couplings between symmetric and asymmetric channels yield an effective TASEP with nonzero particle flux in the asymmetric channel and zero flux on the symmetric lattice. For intermediate strength of couplings between the lattices a vertical cluster mean-field method is developed. This approximate approach treats exactly particle dynamics during the vertical transitions between the channels and it neglects the correlations along the channels. Our calculations show that in all cases there are three stationary phases defined by particle dynamics at entrances, at exits or in the bulk of the system, while phase boundaries depend on the strength and symmetry of couplings between the channels. Extensive Monte Carlo computer simulations strongly support our theoretical predictions.</p>{% endraw %}
