---
layout: post
title: "Positroid varieties I: juggling and geometry"
arxiv-id: "0903.3694"
date: 2009-03-21
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.AG"
  - "math.CO"
authors:
  - "Allen Knutson"
  - "Thomas Lam"
  - "David E Speyer"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
journal-name: "Compos. Math."
journal-ref: "Compos. Math., vol. 149, pp. 1710 - 1752, (2009)"
doi: "10.1112/S0010437X13007240"
related-papers:
  - "1111.3660"
  - "1008.4302"
  - "1008.3939"
  - "1106.2586"
---
{% raw %}<p>While the intersection of the Grassmannian Bruhat decompositions for all coordinate flags is an intractable mess, the intersection of only the {\em cyclic shifts} of one Bruhat decomposition turns out to have many of the good properties of the Bruhat and Richardson decompositions. This decomposition coincides with the projection of the Richardson stratification of the flag manifold, studied by Lusztig, Rietsch, and Brown-Goodearl-Yakimov. However, its cyclic-invariance is hidden in this description. Postnikov gave many cyclic-invariant ways to index the strata, and we give a new one, by a subset of the affine Weyl group we call {\em bounded juggling patterns}. We adopt his terminology and call the strata {\em positroid varieties.} We show that positroid varieties are normal and Cohen-Macaulay, and are defined as schemes by the vanishing of Plucker coordinates. We compute their T-equivariant Hilbert series, and show that their associated cohomology classes are represented by affine Stanley functions. This latter fact lets us connect Postnikov's and Buch-Kresch-Tamvakis' approaches to quantum Schubert calculus. Our principal tools are the Frobenius splitting results for Richardson varieties as developed by Brion, Lakshmibai, and Littelmann, and the Hodge-Grobner degeneration of the Grassmannian. We show that each positroid variety degenerates to the projective Stanley-Reisner scheme of a shellable ball.</p>{% endraw %}
