---
layout: post
title: "Tableaux combinatorics for the asymmetric exclusion process and Askey-Wilson polynomials"
arxiv-id: "0910.1858"
date: 2009-10-09
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.CO"
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
  - "math.PR"
authors:
  - "Sylvie Corteel"
  - "Lauren Williams"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
journal-name: "PNAS"
journal-ref: "PNAS, vol. 107, pp. 6726 - 6730, (2009)"
doi: "10.1073/pnas.0909915107"
related-papers:
  - "math/0602109"
  - "1811.01047"
  - "2202.00214"
  - "1510.05023"
  - "1811.01024"
---
{% raw %}<p>Introduced in the late 1960's, the asymmetric exclusion process (ASEP) is an important model from statistical mechanics which describes a system of interacting particles hopping left and right on a one-dimensional lattice of n sites with open boundaries. It has been cited as a model for traffic flow and protein synthesis. In the most general form of the ASEP with open boundaries, particles may enter and exit at the left with probabilities alpha and gamma, and they may exit and enter at the right with probabilities beta and delta. In the bulk, the probability of hopping left is q times the probability of hopping right. The first main result of this paper is a combinatorial formula for the stationary distribution of the ASEP with all parameters general, in terms of a new class of tableaux which we call staircase tableaux. This generalizes our previous work for the ASEP with parameters gamma=delta=0. Using our first result and also results of Uchiyama-Sasamoto-Wadati, we derive our second main result: a combinatorial formula for the moments of Askey-Wilson polynomials. Since the early 1980's there has been a great deal of work giving combinatorial formulas for moments of various other classical orthogonal polynomials (e.g. Hermite, Charlier, Laguerre, Meixner). However, this is the first such formula for the Askey-Wilson polynomials, which are at the top of the hierarchy of classical orthogonal polynomials.</p>{% endraw %}
