---
layout: post
title: "Phase-plane analysis of driven multi-lane exclusion models"
arxiv-id: "1208.4916"
date: 2012-08-24
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
authors:
  - "Vandana Yadav"
  - "Rajesh Singh"
  - "Sutapa Mukherji"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
journal-name: "JSTAT"
journal-ref: "JSTAT, vol. 2012, pp. P04004, (2012)"
doi: "10.1088/1742-5468/2012/04/P04004"
related-papers:
  - "1308.5845"
  - "1309.6757"
  - "0705.0596"
  - "cond-mat/0703375"
  - "0912.4608"
---
{% raw %}<p>We show how a fixed point based boundary-layer analysis technique can be used to obtain the steady-state particle density profiles of driven exclusion processes on two-lane systems with open boundaries. We have considered two distinct two-lane systems. In the first, particles hop on the lanes in one direction obeying exclusion principle and there is no exchange of particles between the lanes. The hopping on one lane is affected by the particle occupancies on the other, which thereby introduces an indirect interaction among the lanes. Through a phase plane analysis of the boundary layer equation, we show why the bulk density undergoes a sharp change as the interaction between the lanes is increased. The second system involves one lane with driven exclusion process and the other with biased diffusion of particles. In contrast to the previous model, here there is a direct interaction between the lanes due to particle exchange between them. In this model, we have looked at two possible scenarios with constant (flat) and non-constant bulk profiles. The fixed point based boundary layer method provides a new perspective on several aspects including those related to maximal/minimal current phases, possibilities of shocks under very restricted boundary conditions for the flat profile but over a wide range of boundary conditions for the non-constant profile.</p>{% endraw %}
