---
layout: post
title: "Littelmann path model for geometric crystals, Whittaker functions on Lie groups and Brownian motion"
arxiv-id: "1302.0902"
date: 2013-02-04
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
  - "math.GR"
  - "math.RT"
authors:
  - "Reda Chhaibi"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
related-papers:
  - "1405.6437"
  - "1504.07321"
  - "0804.2356"
---
{% raw %}<p>Generally speaking, this thesis focuses on the interplay between the representations of Lie groups and probability theory. It subdivides into essentially three parts. In a first rather algebraic part, we construct a path model for geometric crystals in the sense of Berenstein and Kazhdan, for complex semi-simple Lie groups. We will mainly describe the algebraic structure, its natural morphisms and parameterizations. The theory of total positivity will play a particularly important role. Then, we anticipate on the probabilistic part by exhibiting a canonical measure on geometric crystals. It uses as ingredients the superpotential for the flag manifold and a measure invariant under the crystal actions. The image measure under the weight map plays the role of Duistermaat-Heckman measure. Its Laplace transform defines Whittaker functions, providing an interesting formula for all Lie groups. Then it appears clearly that Whittaker functions are to geometric crystals, what characters are to combinatorial crystals. The Littlewood-Richardson rule is also exposed. Finally we present the probabilistic approach that allows to find the canonical measure. It is based on the fundamental idea that the Wiener measure will induce the adequate measure on the algebraic structures through the path model. In the last chapter, we show how our geometric model degenerates to the continuous classical Littelmann path model and thus recover known results. For example, the canonical measure on a geometric crystal of highest weight degenerates into a uniform measure on a polytope, and recovers the parameterizations of continuous crystals.</p>{% endraw %}
