---
title: "Tricolor percolation and random paths in 3D"
arxiv-id: "1309.7490"
date: 2013-09-28
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
  - "math-ph"
authors:
  - "Scott Sheffield"
  - "Ariel Yadin"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
journal-name: "EJP"
journal-ref: "EJP, vol. 19, pp. 1-23, (2014)"
doi: "10.1214/EJP.V19-3073"
related-papers:
  - "cond-mat/0206452"
---
{% raw %}<p>We study "tricolor percolation" on the regular tessellation of R^3 by truncated octahedra, which is the three-dimensional analog of the hexagonal tiling of the plane. We independently assign one of three colors to each cell according to a probability vector p = (p_1, p_2, p_3) and define a "tricolor edge" to be an edge incident to one cell of each color. The tricolor edges form disjoint loops and/or infinite paths. These loops and paths have been studied in the physics literature, but little has been proved mathematically. We show that each p belongs to either the compact phase (in which the length of the tricolor loop passing through a fixed edge is a.s. finite, with exponentially decaying law) or the extended phase (in which the probability that an n by n by n box intersects a tricolor path of diameter at least n exceeds a positive constant, independent of n). We show that both phases are non-empty and the extended phase is a closed subset of the probability simplex. We also survey the physics literature and discuss open questions, including the following: Does p=(1/3,1/3,1/3) belong to the extended phase? Is there a.s. an infinite tricolor path for this p? Are there infinitely many? Do they scale to Brownian motion? If p lies on the boundary of the extended phase, do the long paths have a scaling limit analogous to SLE_6 in two dimensions? What can be shown for the higher dimensional analogs of this problem?</p>{% endraw %}
