---
title: "Spectral theory for interacting particle systems solvable by coordinate Bethe ansatz"
arxiv-id: "1407.8534"
date: 2014-07-31
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math-ph"
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
  - "math.MP"
authors:
  - "Alexei Borodin"
  - "Ivan Corwin"
  - "Leonid Petrov"
  - "Tomohiro Sasamoto"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
journal-name: "Comm. Math. Phys."
journal-ref: "Comm. Math. Phys., vol. 339, pp. 1167-1245, (2014)"
doi: "10.1007/s00220-015-2424-7"
related-papers:
  - "1308.3475"
  - "1811.06475"
---
{% raw %}<p>We develop spectral theory for the q-Hahn stochastic particle system introduced recently by Povolotsky. That is, we establish a Plancherel type isomorphism result which implies completeness and biorthogonality statements for the Bethe ansatz eigenfunctions of the system. Owing to a Markov duality with the q-Hahn TASEP (a discrete-time generalization of TASEP with particles' jump distribution being the orthogonality weight for the classical q-Hahn orthogonal polynomials), we write down moment formulas which characterize the fixed time distribution of the q-Hahn TASEP with general initial data. The Bethe ansatz eigenfunctions of the q-Hahn system degenerate into eigenfunctions of other (not necessarily stochastic) interacting particle systems solvable by the coordinate Bethe ansatz. This includes the ASEP, the (asymmetric) six-vertex model, and the Heisenberg XXZ spin chain (all models are on the infinite lattice). In this way, each of the latter systems possesses a spectral theory, too. In particular, biorthogonality of the ASEP eigenfunctions which follows from the corresponding q-Hahn statement implies symmetrization identities of Tracy and Widom (for ASEP with either step or step Bernoulli initial configuration) as corollaries. Another degeneration takes the q-Hahn system to the q-Boson particle system (dual to q-TASEP) studied in detail in our previous paper (2013). Thus, at the spectral theory level we unify two discrete-space regularizations of the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang equation / stochastic heat equation, namely, q-TASEP and ASEP.</p>{% endraw %}
