---
title: "A quantization of the harmonic analysis on the infinite-dimensional unitary group"
arxiv-id: "1504.06832"
date: 2015-04-26
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.RT"
  - "math.CA"
  - "math.CO"
authors:
  - "Vadim Gorin"
  - "Grigori Olshanski"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
journal-name: "J. Funct. Anal."
journal-ref: "J. Funct. Anal., (2015)"
doi: "10.1016/J.JFA.2015.06.006"
related-papers:
  - "math/0109194"
  - "math/0109193"
  - "1009.2029"
  - "math/9810013"
  - "math/0312270"
---
{% raw %}<p>The present work stemmed from the study of the problem of harmonic analysis on the infinite-dimensional unitary group U(\infty). That problem consisted in the decomposition of a certain 4-parameter family of unitary representations, which replace the nonexisting two-sided regular representation (Olshanski, J. Funct. Anal., 2003, arXiv:0109193). The required decomposition is governed by certain probability measures on an infinite-dimensional space \Omega, which is a dual object to U(\infty). A way to describe those measures is to convert them into determinantal point processes on the real line, it turned out that their correlation kernels are computable in explicit form --- they admit a closed expression in terms of the Gauss hypergeometric function 2-F-1 (Borodin and Olshanski, Ann. Math., 2005, arXiv:0109194). In the present work we describe a (nonevident) q-discretization of the whole construction. This leads us to a new family of determinantal point processes. We reveal its connection with an exotic finite system of q-discrete orthogonal polynomials --- the so-called pseudo big q-Jacobi polynomials. The new point processes live on a double q-lattice and we show that their correlation kernels are expressed through the basic hypergeometric function 2-\phi-1. A crucial novel ingredient of our approach is an extended version G of the Gelfand-Tsetlin graph (the conventional graph describes the Gelfand-Tsetlin branching rule for irreducible representations of unitary groups). We find the q-boundary of G, thus extending previously known results (Gorin, Adv. Math., 2012, arXiv:1011.1769).</p>{% endraw %}
