---
title: "Tilted elastic lines with columnar and point disorder, non-Hermitian quantum mechanics and spiked random matrices: pinning and localization"
arxiv-id: "2009.11284"
date: 2020-09-23T17:56:02Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
  - "cond-mat.dis-nn"
  - "math-ph"
authors:
  - "Alexandre Krajenbrink"
  - "Pierre Le Doussal"
  - "Neil O'Connell"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
journal-name: "Phys. Rev. E"
journal-ref: "Phys. Rev. E, vol. 103 4-1, pp. 042120, (2021)"
doi: "10.1103/PhysRevE.103.042120"
related-papers:
  - "math/0703912"
---
{% raw %}<p>We revisit the problem of an elastic line (e.g. a vortex line in a superconductor) subject to both columnar disorder and point disorder in dimension <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>d</mi><mo>=</mo><mn>1</mn><mo>+</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">d=1+1</annotation></semantics></math></span>. Upon applying a transverse field, a delocalization transition is expected, beyond which the line is tilted macroscopically. We investigate this transition in the fixed tilt angle ensemble and within a one-way model where backward jumps are neglected. From recent results about directed polymers and their connections to random matrix theory, we find that for a single line and a single strong defect this transition in presence of point disorder coincides with the Baik-Ben Arous-Peche (BBP) transition for the appearance of outliers in the spectrum of a perturbed random matrix in the GUE. This transition is conveniently described in the polymer picture by a variational calculation. In the delocalized phase, the ground state energy exhibits Tracy-Widom fluctuations. In the localized phase we show, using the variational calculation, that the fluctuations of the occupation length along the columnar defect are described by <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><msub><mi>f</mi><mrow><mi>K</mi><mi>P</mi><mi>Z</mi></mrow></msub></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">f_{KPZ}</annotation></semantics></math></span>, a distribution which appears ubiquitously in the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang universality class. We then consider a smooth density of columnar defect energies. Depending on how this density vanishes at its lower edge we find either (i) a delocalized phase only (ii) a localized phase with a delocalization transition. We analyze this transition which is an infinite-rank extension of the BBP transition. The fluctuations of the ground state energy of a single elastic line in the localized phase (for fixed columnar defect energies) are described by a Fredholm determinant based on a new kernel. The case of many columns and many non-intersecting lines, relevant for the study of the Bose glass phase, is also analyzed. The ground state energy is obtained using free probability and the Burgers equation.</p>{% endraw %}
