---
layout: post
title: "Discrete and continuous Muttalib--Borodin processes I: the hard edge"
arxiv-id: "2010.15529"
date: 2020-10-29T12:50:15Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
  - "math-ph"
  - "math.CO"
authors:
  - "Dan Betea"
  - "Alessandra Occelli"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
journal-name: "Ann. IHP"
journal-ref: "Ann. IHP, (2020)"
doi: "10.4171/aihpd/189"
related-papers:
  - "2011.07890"
  - "2505.23164"
  - "2008.01319"
---
{% raw %}<p>In this note we study a natural measure on plane partitions giving rise to a certain discrete-time Muttalib-Borodin process (MBP): each time-slice is a discrete version of a Muttalib-Borodin ensemble (MBE). The process is determinantal with explicit time-dependent correlation kernel. Moreover, in the <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>q</mi><mo>→</mo><mn>1</mn></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">q \to 1</annotation></semantics></math></span> limit, it converges to a continuous Jacobi-like MBP with Muttalib-Borodin marginals supported on the unit interval. This continuous process is also determinantal with explicit correlation kernel. We study its hard-edge scaling limit (around 0) to obtain a discrete-time-dependent generalization of the classical continuous Bessel kernel of random matrix theory (and, in fact, of the Meijer <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>G</mi></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">G</annotation></semantics></math></span>-kernel as well). We lastly discuss two related applications: random sampling from such processes, and their interpretations as models of directed last passage percolation (LPP). In doing so, we introduce a corner growth model naturally associated to Jacobi processes, a version of which is the "usual" corner growth of Forrester-Rains in logarithmic coordinates. The aforementioned hard edge limits for our MBPs lead to interesting asymptotics for these LPP models. In particular, a special cases of our LPP asymptotics give rise (via the random matrix Bessel kernel and following Johansson's lead) to an extremal statistics distribution interpolating between the Tracy-Widom GUE and the Gumbel distributions.</p>{% endraw %}
