---
title: "Extended L-ensembles: a new representation for Determinantal Point Processes"
arxiv-id: "2107.06345"
date: 2021-07-12
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.ST"
  - "stat.TH"
authors:
  - "Nicolas Tremblay"
  - "Simon Barthelm'e"
  - "Konstantin Usevich,
  Pierre-Olivier Amblard"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
journal-name: "Ann. Appl. Probab."
journal-ref: "Ann. Appl. Probab., (2023)"
doi: "10.1214/22-aap1824"
related-papers:
  - "2007.04117"
  - "2107.07213"
  - "1207.6083"
  - "1703.00539"
  - "2406.03360"
---
{% raw %}<p>Determinantal point processes (DPPs) are a class of repulsive point processes, popular for their relative simplicity. They are traditionally defined via their marginal distributions, but a subset of DPPs called "L-ensembles" have tractable likelihoods and are thus particularly easy to work with. Indeed, in many applications, DPPs are more naturally defined based on the L-ensemble formulation rather than through the marginal kernel. The fact that not all DPPs are L-ensembles is unfortunate, but there is a unifying description. We introduce here extended L-ensembles, and show that all DPPs are extended L-ensembles (and vice-versa). Extended L-ensembles have very simple likelihood functions, contain L-ensembles and projection DPPs as special cases. From a theoretical standpoint, they fix some pathologies in the usual formalism of DPPs, for instance the fact that projection DPPs are not L-ensembles. From a practical standpoint, they extend the set of kernel functions that may be used to define DPPs: we show that conditional positive definite kernels are good candidates for defining DPPs, including DPPs that need no spatial scale parameter. Finally, extended L-ensembles are based on so-called ``saddle-point matrices'', and we prove an extension of the Cauchy-Binet theorem for such matrices that may be of independent interest.</p>{% endraw %}
