---
layout: post
title: "Rewriting History in Integrable Stochastic Particle Systems"
arxiv-id: "2212.01643"
date: 2022-12-03T16:23:32Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
authors:
  - "Leonid Petrov"
  - "Axel Saenz"
nsf-frg: true
source: import
published: true
related-papers:
  - "1912.06067"
  - "1907.09155"
  - "1811.06475"
  - "math/0609188"
---
{% raw %}<p>Many integrable stochastic particle systems in one space dimension (such as TASEP - Totally Asymmetric Simple Exclusion Process - and its <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>q</mi></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">q</annotation></semantics></math></span>-deformation, the <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>q</mi></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">q</annotation></semantics></math></span>-TASEP) remain integrable if we equip each particle with its own speed parameter. In this work, we present intertwining relations between Markov transition operators of particle systems which differ by a permutation of the speed parameters. These relations generalize our previous works (arXiv:1907.09155, arXiv:1912.06067), but here we employ a novel approach based on the Yang-Baxter equation for the higher spin stochastic six vertex model. Our intertwiners are Markov transition operators, which leads to interesting probabilistic consequences. First, we obtain a new Lax-type differential equation for the Markov transition semigroups of homogeneous, continuous-time versions of our particle systems. Our Lax equation encodes the time evolution of multipoint observables of the <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>q</mi></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">q</annotation></semantics></math></span>-TASEP and TASEP in a unified way, which may be of interest for the asymptotic analysis of multipoint observables of these systems. Second, we show that our intertwining relations lead to couplings between probability measures on trajectories of particle systems which differ by a permutation of the speed parameters. The conditional distribution for such a coupling is realized as a "rewriting history" random walk which randomly resamples the trajectory of a particle in a chamber determined by the trajectories of the neighboring particles. As a byproduct, we construct a new coupling for standard Poisson processes on the positive real half-line with different rates.</p>{% endraw %}
