---
title: "Critical measures on higher genus Riemann surfaces"
arxiv-id: "2207.02068"
date: 2022-07-05T14:18:21Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.CV"
  - "math-ph"
authors:
  - "Marco Bertola"
  - "Alan Groot"
  - "Arno B. J. Kuijlaars"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
journal-name: "Comm. Math. Phys."
journal-ref: "Comm. Math. Phys., vol. 404, pp. 51 - 95, (2022)"
doi: "10.1007/s00220-023-04832-4"
related-papers:
  - "1509.06704"
---
{% raw %}<p>Critical measures in the complex plane are saddle points for the logarithmic energy with external field. Their local and global structure was described by Martinez-Finkelshtein and Rakhmanov. In this paper we start the development of a theory of critical measures on higher genus Riemann surfaces, where the logarithmic energy is replaced by the energy with respect to a bipolar Green's kernel. We study a max-min problem for the bipolar Green's energy with external fields Re V where dV is a meromorphic differential. Under reasonable assumptions the max-min problem has a solution and we show that the corresponding equilibrium measure is a critical measure in the external field. In a special genus one situation we are able to show that the critical measure is supported on maximal trajectories of a meromorphic quadratic differential. We are motivated by applications to random lozenge tilings of a hexagon with periodic weightings. Correlations in these models are expressible in terms of matrix valued orthogonal polynomials. The matrix orthogonality is interpreted as (partial) scalar orthogonality on a Riemann surface. The theory of critical measures will be useful for the asymptotic analysis of a corresponding Riemann-Hilbert problem as we outline in the paper.</p>{% endraw %}
