---
layout: post
title: "Quasi-polynomial representations of double affine Hecke algebras"
arxiv-id: "2204.13729"
date: 2022-04-28T18:18:16Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.RT"
  - "math.QA"
authors:
  - "Siddhartha Sahi"
  - "Jasper Stokman"
  - "Vidya Venkateswaran"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
related-papers:
  - "0807.2714"
journal-name: "Forum Math. Sigma"
journal-ref: "Forum Math. Sigma, vol. 13, (2022)"
doi: "10.1017/fms.2025.33"
---
{% raw %}<p>We introduce an explicit family of representations of the double affine Hecke algebra <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi mathvariant="double-struck">H</mi></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">\mathbb{H}</annotation></semantics></math></span> acting on spaces of quasi-polynomials, defined in terms of truncated Demazure-Lusztig type operators. We show that these quasi-polynomial representations provide concrete realizations of a natural family of cyclic <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>Y</mi></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">Y</annotation></semantics></math></span>-parabolically induced <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi mathvariant="double-struck">H</mi></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">\mathbb{H}</annotation></semantics></math></span>-representations. We recover Cherednik's well-known polynomial representation as a special case. The quasi-polynomial representation gives rise to a family of commuting operators acting on spaces of quasi-polynomials. These generalize the Cherednik operators, which are fundamental in the study of Macdonald polynomials. We provide a detailed study of their joint eigenfunctions, which may be regarded as quasi-polynomial, multi-parametric generalizations of nonsymmetric Macdonald polynomials. We also introduce generalizations of symmetric Macdonald polynomials, which are invariant under a multi-parametric generalization of the standard Weyl group action. We connect our results to the representation theory of metaplectic covers of reductive groups over non-archimedean local fields. We introduce root system generalizations of the metaplectic polynomials from our previous work by taking a suitable restriction and reparametrization of the quasi-polynomial generalizations of Macdonald polynomials. We show that metaplectic Iwahori-Whittaker functions can be recovered by taking the Whittaker limit of these metaplectic polynomials.</p>{% endraw %}
