---
title: "Robustness of Kardar-Parisi-Zhang scaling in a classical integrable spin chain with broken integrability"
arxiv-id: "2205.03858"
date: 2022-05-08T13:08:31Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "cond-mat.stat-mech"
  - "math-ph"
  - "nlin.CD"
authors:
  - "Dipankar Roy"
  - "Abhishek Dhar"
  - "Herbert Spohn"
  - "Manas Kulkarni"
nsf-frg: false
source: fetch
published: true
journal-name: "Phys. Rev. B"
journal-ref: "Phys. Rev. B, (2022)"
doi: "10.1103/PhysRevB.107.L100413"
related-papers:
  - "2406.07150"
  - "2205.02853"
  - "2107.00038"
  - "1203.2530"
  - "1106.1596"
---
{% raw %}<p>Recent investigations have observed superdiffusion in integrable classical and quantum spin chains. An intriguing connection between these spin chains and Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) universality class has emerged. Theoretical developments (e.g. generalized hydrodynamics) have highlighted the role of integrability as well as spin-symmetry in KPZ behaviour. However understanding their precise role on superdiffusive transport still remains a challenging task. The widely used quantum spin chain platform comes with severe numerical limitations. To circumvent this barrier, we focus on a classical integrable spin chain which was shown to have deep analogy with the quantum spin-<span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mfrac><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mfrac></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">\frac{1}{2}</annotation></semantics></math></span> Heisenberg chain. Remarkably, we find that KPZ behaviour prevails even when one considers integrability-breaking but spin-symmetry preserving terms, strongly indicating that spin-symmetry plays a central role even in the non-perturbative regime. On the other hand, in the non-perturbative regime, we find that energy correlations exhibit clear diffusive behaviour. We also study the classical analog of out-of-time-ordered correlator (OTOC) and Lyapunov exponents. We find significant presence of chaos for the integrability-broken cases even though KPZ behaviour remains robust. The robustness of KPZ behaviour is demonstrated for a wide class of spin-symmetry preserving integrability-breaking terms.</p>{% endraw %}
