---
title: "Tilted biorthogonal ensembles, Grothendieck random partitions, and determinantal tests"
arxiv-id: "2305.17747"
date: 2023-05-28T15:00:48Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
authors:
  - "Svetlana Gavrilova"
  - "Leonid Petrov"
nsf-frg: true
source: import
published: true
journal-name: "Selecta Math."
journal-ref: "Selecta Math., vol. 30, (2024)"
doi: "10.1007/s00029-024-00945-3"
related-papers:
  - "math/9907127"
  - "math/9804027"
  - "math/9906120"
---
{% raw %}<p>We study probability measures on partitions based on symmetric Grothendieck polynomials. These deformations of Schur polynomials introduced in the K-theory of Grassmannians share many common properties. Our Grothendieck measures are analogs of the Schur measures on partitions introduced by Okounkov (arXiv:math/9907127 [math.RT]). Despite the similarity of determinantal formulas for the probability weights of Schur and Grothendieck measures, we demonstrate that Grothendieck measures are \emph{not} determinantal point processes. This question is related to the principal minor assignment problem in algebraic geometry, and we employ a determinantal test first obtained by Nanson in 1897 for the <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mn>4</mn><mo>×</mo><mn>4</mn></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">4\times4</annotation></semantics></math></span> problem. We also propose a procedure for getting Nanson-like determinantal tests for matrices of any size <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>n</mi><mo>≥</mo><mn>4</mn></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">n\ge4</annotation></semantics></math></span> which appear new for <span class="katex"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><mrow><mi>n</mi><mo>≥</mo><mn>5</mn></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">n\ge 5</annotation></semantics></math></span>. By placing the Grothendieck measures into a new framework of tilted biorthogonal ensembles generalizing a rich class of determinantal processes introduced by Borodin (arXiv:math/9804027 [math.CA]), we identify Grothendieck random partitions as a cross-section of a Schur process, a determinantal process in two dimensions. This identification expresses the correlation functions of Grothendieck measures through sums of Fredholm determinants, which are not immediately suitable for asymptotic analysis. A more direct approach allows us to obtain a limit shape result for the Grothendieck random partitions. The limit shape curve is not particularly explicit as it arises as a cross-section of the limit shape surface for the Schur process. The gradient of this surface is expressed through the argument of a complex root of a cubic equation.</p>{% endraw %}
