---
layout: post
title: "Periodic Pitman transforms and jointly invariant measures"
arxiv-id: "2409.03613"
date: 2024-09-05T15:17:29Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
authors:
  - "Ivan Corwin"
  - "Yu Gu"
  - "Evan Sorensen"
nsf-frg: false
source: import
published: true
journal-name: "Comm. Math. Phys."
journal-ref: "Comm. Math. Phys., vol. 407, (2024)"
doi: "10.1007/s00220-025-05541-w"
related-papers:
  - "2309.17276"
  - "2512.03328"
  - "2508.05603"
---
{% raw %}<p>We construct explicit jointly invariant measures for the periodic KPZ equation (and therefore also the stochastic Burgers' and stochastic heat equations) for general slope parameters and prove their uniqueness via a one force--one solution principle. The measures are given by polymer-like transforms of independent Brownian bridges. We describe several properties and limits of these measures, including an extension to a continuous process in the slope parameter that we term the periodic KPZ horizon. As an application of our construction, we prove a Gaussian process limit theorem with an explicit covariance function for the long-time height function fluctuations of the periodic KPZ equation when started from varying slopes. In connection with this, we conjecture a formula for the fluctuations of cumulants of the endpoint distribution for the periodic continuum directed random polymer. To prove joint invariance, we address the analogous problem for a semi-discrete system of SDEs related to the periodic O'Connell-Yor polymer model and then perform a scaling limit of the model and jointly invariant measures. For the semi-discrete system, we demonstrate a bijection that maps our systems of SDEs to another system with product invariant measure. Inverting the map on this product measure yields our invariant measures. This map relates to a periodic version of the discrete geometric Pitman transform that we introduce and probe. As a by-product of this, we show that the jointly invariant measures for a periodic version of the inverse-gamma polymer are the same as those for the O'Connell-Yor polymer.</p>{% endraw %}
