---
title: "Mallows Product Measure"
arxiv-id: "2402.09892"
date: 2024-02-15T11:36:52Z
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.PR"
authors:
  - "Alexey Bufetov"
  - "Kailun Chen"
nsf-frg: false
source: import
published: true
journal-name: "EJP"
journal-ref: "EJP, (2024)"
doi: "10.1214/24-EJP1211"
related-papers:
  - "1702.00140"
---
{% raw %}<p>Q-exchangeable ergodic distributions on the infinite symmetric group were classified by Gnedin-Olshanski (2012). In this paper, we study a specific linear combination of the ergodic measures and call it the Mallows product measure. From a particle system perspective, the Mallows product measure is a reversible stationary blocking measure of the infinite-species ASEP and it is a natural multi-species extension of the Bernoulli product blocking measures of the one-species ASEP. Moreover, the Mallows product measure can be viewed as the universal product blocking measure of interacting particle systems coming from random walks on Hecke algebras. For the random infinite permutation distributed according to the Mallows product measure we have computed the joint distribution of its neighboring displacements, as well as several other observables. The key feature of the obtained formulas is their remarkably simple product structure. We project these formulas to ASEP with finitely many species, which in particular recovers a recent result of Adams-Balazs-Jay, and also to ASEP(q,M). Our main tools are results of Gnedin-Olshanski about ergodic Mallows measures and shift-invariance symmetries of the stochastic colored six vertex model discovered by Borodin-Gorin-Wheeler and Galashin.</p>{% endraw %}
