---
title: "Maximal entropy random walks and central Markov chains"
arxiv-id: "2503.08172"
date: 2025-03-11
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.CO"
  - "math.PR"
authors:
  - "Yoann Offret"
  - "Sergey Dovgal"
nsf-frg: false
source: manual
published: true
related-papers:
  - "1503.04117"
---
{% raw %}<p>We introduce and develop the concept of Maximal Entropy Random Walks (MERWs) on Weighted Bratteli Diagrams (WBDs), maximizing entropy production along paths as a natural criterion for choosing random walks on networks. Initially defined for irreducible finite graphs, MERWs were recently extended to the infinite setting in [1]. Bratteli Diagrams model various growth processes, such as the Young Lattice, where the Plancherel growth process emerges as a MERW. We show that MERWs are special cases of central Markov chains, which, in general, provide a powerful framework for deriving combinatorial identities. Regarding growing trees, in particular, we retrieve and extend Han's hook-length formula for binary trees and demonstrate that the Binary Search Tree (BST) process is a MERW, recovering its asymptotic behavior. We also introduce preferential attachment to generalize BSTs. For comb models, significant central measures appear, including the Chinese restaurant process, providing an alternative proof of the Poisson-Dirichlet limit distribution. Finally, we propose a Monte Carlo method, based on Knuth's algorithm, to approximate MERWs. We apply it to a pyramidal growth model, drawing connections with the limit shape of Young diagrams under the Plancherel measure.</p>{% endraw %}
