---
layout: post
title: "Introduction to the Cohomology of the Flag Variety"
arxiv-id: "2506.21064"
date: 2025-06-26
categories: arxiv-feed
arxiv-categories:
  - "math.CO"
  - "math.AC"
  - "math.AG"
authors:
  - "Sara C. Billey"
  - "Yibo Gao"
  - "Brendan Pawlowski"
nsf-frg: false
source: manual
published: true
---
{% raw %}<p>One hundred years ago, Hilbert gave a list of important open problems in mathematics. His 15th problem asked for the development of a rigorous calculus explaining Schubert's enumerative results for intersecting varieties defined by rank conditions on vector spaces. Today by way of many contributions in algebraic topology, geometry, and combinatorics, we consider this solved. Yet, deep questions remain about the subtleties of actually carrying out the process. In this chapter, we hope to summarize the rigorous development of what has become known as Schubert calculus, with an eye toward computation. We discuss Grassmannians and flag varieties and their cohomology rings, following Monk's constructive algebraic approach. We derive formulas for Schur and Schubert polynomials, which represent cohomology classes of Schubert varieties. We hint at the vast literature in this area and point to the other references in the Handbook for more information. Finally, we identify open problems that remain a challenge even with modern tools at our fingertips in hopes of inspiring further contributions in this fascinating field. This is intended as the first chapter of a book entitled "Handbook of Combinatorial Algebraic Geometry: Subvarieties of the Flag Variety", a compendium of topics in the area. The book is being edited by Erik Insko, Martha Precup, and Ed Richmond. In addition to this introductory chapter, others will cover more advanced topics such as Kazhdan-Lusztig varieties, generalized smooth Schubert varieties, Richardson varieties and positroid varieties, spherical and torus orbit closures, spanning line configurations, different types of Hessenberg varieties, and generalizations to Kac-Moody flag varieties, each written by experts in those areas. We hope you enjoy this chapter enough to seek out the others, and that you send us any comments or corrections you find as you read this article!</p>{% endraw %}
